add tiup-cluster-topology-reference.md (#5314)
pingcap/docs: tiup/tiup-cluster-topology-reference.md

---
title: Topology Configuration File for TiDB Deployment Using TiUP
---

# Topology Configuration File for TiDB Deployment Using TiUP

To deploy or scale TiDB using TiUP, you need to provide a topology file ([sample](https://github.com/pingcap/tiup/blob/master/embed/templates/examples/topology.example.yaml)) to describe the cluster topology.

> Similarly, to modify the cluster topology, you need to modify the topology file. The difference is that you can modify only a part of the fields in the topology file. This document introduces each section of the topology file and each field in each section.

Reviewer: > The difference is that you can modify only a part of the fields in the topology file.

这个限制只是在集群部署之后只能通过tiup cluster edit-config 修改一部分配置（而不是所有配置）
部署之前的 topology 还是可以随便改的

Author: @lucklove PTAL
```suggestion
Similarly, to modify the cluster topology, you need to modify the topology file. The difference is that, after the cluster is deployed, you can only modify a part of the fields in the topology file. This document introduces each section of the topology file and each field in each section.
```

Reviewer: LGTM

## File structure

> A topology configuration file for TiDB deployment using TiUP might contains the following sections:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A topology configuration file for TiDB deployment using TiUP might contain the following sections:
```

### `monitored`

`monitored` is used to configure the monitoring service on the target machine: [node_exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter) and [blackbox_exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/blackbox_exporter). The following fields are included:

- `node_exporter_port`: The service port of node_exporter. The default value is `9100`.

- `blackbox_exporter_port`: The service port of blackbox_exporter. The default value is `9115`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `data_dir`: Specifies the data directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `data_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `log_dir`: Specifies the log directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the log is generated according to the `log_dir` directory configured in `global`.

A `monitored` configuration example:

```yaml
monitored:
  node_exporter_port: 9100
  blackbox_exporter_port: 9115
```

> The above configuration specifies that `node_exporter` uses the `9100` port and `blackbox_exporter` uses the `9115` port.

Author: Done

- `pump`: Pump service-related configuration. For the complete configuration, see [TiDB Binlog configuration file](/tidb-binlog/tidb-binlog-configuration-file.md#pump).

- `drainer`: Drainer service-related configuration. For the complete configuration, see [TiDB Binlog configuration file](/tidb-binlog/tidb-binlog-configuration-file.md#drainer).

- `cdc`: TiCDC service-related configuration. For the complete configuration, see [Deploy TiCDC](/ticdc/deploy-ticdc.md).

A `server_configs` configuration example is as follows:

```yaml
server_configs:
  tidb:
    run-ddl: true
    lease: "45s"
    split-table: true
    token-limit: 1000
  tikv:
    log-level: "info"
    readpool.unified.min-thread-count: 1
```

The above configuration specifies the global configuration of TiDB and TiKV.

### `pd_servers`

`pd_servers` specifies the machines to which PD services are deployed. It also specifies the service configuration on each machine. `pd_servers` is an array, and each element of the array contains the following fields:

> - `host`: Specifies the machine to which the PD services are deployed. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `host`: Specifies the machine to which the PD services are deployed. The field value is an IP address and is mandatory.
```

- `listen_host`: When the machine has multiple IP addresses, `listen_host` specifies the listening IP address of the service. The default value is `0.0.0.0`.

> - `ssh_port`: The SSH port used when connecting to the target machine for operations. If it is not specified, the `ssh_port` of the `global` section is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ssh_port`: Specifies the SSH port to connect to the target machine for operations. If it is not specified, the `ssh_port` of the `global` section is used.
```

> - `host`: Specifies the machine on which the PD services are deploy. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `host`: Specifies the machine on which the PD services are deployed. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.
```

- `name`: Specifies the name of the PD instance. Different instances must have unique names; otherwise, instances cannot be deployed.

- `client_port`: Specifies the port that PD uses to connect to the client. The default value is `2379`.

- `peer_port`: Specifies the port for communication between PDs. The default value is `2380`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `data_dir`: Specifies the data directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `data_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `log_dir`: Specifies the log directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the log is generated according to the `log_dir` directory configured in `global`.

> - `numa_node`: Allocates the NUMA policy to the instance. If this parameter is specified, you need to ensure that the target machine has [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl) installed. When this parameter is specified, cpubind and membind policies are allocated via [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl). This parameter field is the string type. The field value is the ID of the NUMA node, such as "0,1".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `numa_node`: Allocates the NUMA policy to the instance. Before specifying this field, you need to make sure that the target machine has [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl) installed. If this field is specified, cpubind and membind policies are allocated using [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl). This field is the string type. The field value is the ID of the NUMA node, such as "0,1".
```

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

- `resource_control`: Resource control for the service. If this field is configured, the field content is merged with the `resource_control` content in `global` (if the two fields overlap, the content of this field takes effect). Then, a systemd configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`. The configuration rules of `resource_control` are the same as the `resource_control` content in `global`.

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `log_dir`
- `gc-ttl`
- `tz`
- `arch`
- `os`

A `cdc_servers` configuration example:

```yaml
cdc_servers:
  - host: 10.0.1.20
    gc-ttl: 86400
  - host: 10.0.1.21
```

### `tispark_masters`

`tispark_masters` specifies the machines on which the master node of TiSpark is deployed. It also specifies the service configuration on each machine. `tispark_masters` is an array. Each array element contains the following fields:

> - `host`: Specifies the machine on which the TiSpark master is deploy. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `host`: Specifies the machine on which the TiSpark master is deployed. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.
```

- `listen_host`: When the machine has multiple IP addresses, `listen_host` specifies the listening IP address of the service. The default value is `0.0.0.0`.

- `ssh_port`: The SSH port used when connecting to the target machine for operations. If it is not specified, the `ssh_port` of the `global` section is used.

- `port`: Spark's listening port, used for communication before the node. The default value is `7077`.

- `web_port`: Spark's web port, which provides web services and the task status. The default value is `8080`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

> - `java_home`: Specifies the path in which the JRE environment to be used is located. This parameter corresponds to the `JAVA_HOME` system environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `java_home`: Specifies the path of the JRE environment to be used. This parameter corresponds to the `JAVA_HOME` system environment variable.
```

> - `spark_config`: Used to configure the TiSpark services. Then, a configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `spark_config`: Configures the TiSpark services. Then, a configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`.
```

- `spark_env`: Configures the environment variables when Spark starts.

- `os`: The operating system of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `os` value in `global`.

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `listen_host`
- `port`
- `web_port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `arch`
- `os`

> A `tispark_masters` configuration example:

Reviewer 3: ditto

- `port`: Spark's listening port, used for communication before the node. The default value is `7077`.

- `web_port`: Spark's web port, which provides web services and the task status. The default value is `8080`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `java_home`: Specifies the path in which the JRE environment to be used is located. This parameter corresponds to the `JAVA_HOME` system environment variable.

- `os`: The operating system of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `os` value in `global`.

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `listen_host`
- `port`
- `web_port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `arch`
- `os`

> A `tispark_workers` configuration example:

Reviewer 3: ditto

- `port`: The listening port of the Prometheus services. The default value is `9090`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `data_dir`: Specifies the data directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `data_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `log_dir`: Specifies the log directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the log is generated according to the `log_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `numa_node`: Allocates the NUMA policy to the instance. If this parameter is specified, you need to ensure that the target machine has [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl) installed. If this parameter is specified, cpubind and membind policies are allocated via [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl). This parameter field is the string type. The field value is the ID of the NUMA node, such as "0,1".

> - `storage_retention`: The retention time of the Prometheus monitoring data. The default value is "15d".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `storage_retention`: The retention time of the Prometheus monitoring data. The default value is `"15d"`.
```

> - `rule_dir`: This field specifies a local directory that should contain complete `*.rules.yml` files. These files are transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the rules for Prometheus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `rule_dir`: Specifies a local directory that should contain complete `*.rules.yml` files. These files are transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the rules for Prometheus.
```

- `os`: The operating system of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `os` value in `global`.

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

- `resource_control`: Resource control for the service. If this field is configured, the field content is merged with the `resource_control` content in `global` (if the two fields overlap, the content of this field takes effect). Then, a systemd configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`. The configuration rules of `resource_control` are the same as the `resource_control` content in `global`.

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `data_dir`
- `log_dir`
- `arch`
- `os`

> A `monitoring_servers` configuration example:

Reviewer 3: ditto

- `host`: Specifies the machine on which the Grafana services are deployed. The field value is the IP address and cannot be omitted.

- `ssh_port`: The SSH port used when connecting to the target machine for operations. If it is not specified, the `ssh_port` of the `global` section is used.

- `port`: The listening port of the Grafana services. The default value is `3000`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `os`: The operating system of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `os` value in `global`.

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

- `username`: The user name on the Grafana login interface.

- `password`: The password corresponding to Grafana.

> - `dashboard_dir`: This field specifies a local directory that should contain complete `dashboard(*.json)` files. These files are transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the dashboards for Grafana.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dashboard_dir`: Specifies a local directory that should contain complete `dashboard(*.json)` files. These files are transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the dashboards for Grafana.
```

- `resource_control`: Resource control for the service. If this field is configured, the field content is merged with the `resource_control` content in `global` (if the two fields overlap, the content of this field takes effect). Then, a systemd configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`. The configuration rules of `resource_control` are the same as the `resource_control` content in `global`.

> **Note:**
>
> If the `dashboard_dir` field of `grafana_servers` is configured, after executing the `tiup cluster rename` command to rename the cluster, you need to perform the following operations:
>

> > + For the `*.json` files in the local dashboards directory, update the value of the `datasource` field to the new cluster name (because `datasource` is named after the cluster name).
> > + Execute the `tiup cluster reload -R grafana` command.

Reviewer 3: > 
```suggestion
> 1. For the `*.json` files in the local dashboards directory, update the value of the `datasource` field to the new cluster name (because `datasource` is named after the cluster name).
> 2. Execute the `tiup cluster reload -R grafana` command.
```

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `arch`
- `os`

> A `grafana_servers` configuration example:

Reviewer 3: ditto

- `cluster_port`: Specifies the communication port between one Alertmanger and other Alertmanager. The default value is `9094`.

- `deploy_dir`: Specifies the deployment directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `deploy_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `data_dir`: Specifies the data directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the directory is generated according to the `data_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `log_dir`: Specifies the log directory. If it is not specified or specified as a relative directory, the log is generated according to the `log_dir` directory configured in `global`.

- `numa_node`: Allocates the NUMA policy to the instance. If this parameter is specified, you need to ensure that the target machine has [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl) installed. If this parameter is specified, cpubind and membind policies are allocated via [numactl](https://linux.die.net/man/8/numactl). This parameter field is the string type. The field value is the ID of the NUMA node, such as "0,1".

> - `config_file`: This field specifies a local file that is transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the configuration of Alertmanager.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `config_file`: Specifies a local file that is transferred to the target machine during the initialization phase of the cluster configuration as the configuration of Alertmanager.
```

- `os`: The operating system of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `os` value in `global`.

- `arch`: The architecture of the machine specified in `host`. If this field is not specified, the default value is the `arch` value in `global`.

- `resource_control`: Resource control for the service. If this field is configured, the field content is merged with the `resource_control` content in `global` (if the two fields overlap, the content of this field takes effect). Then, a systemd configuration file is generated and sent to the machine specified in `host`. The configuration rules of `resource_control` are the same as the `resource_control` content in `global`.

For the above fields, you cannot modify these configured fields after the deployment:

- `host`
- `web_port`
- `cluster_port`
- `deploy_dir`
- `data_dir`
- `log_dir`
- `arch`
- `os`

> A `alertmanager_servers` configuration example:

Reviewer 3: ditto
